---
title: 'MetaReader: A Dataset Meta-Exploration and Documentation Tool'
summary:
    enabled: '1'
    size: 1
    format: short
jscomments:
    provider: facebook
taxonomy:
    category: blog
    tag:
        - 'infoviz'
author:
    name: 'Hassan M. Jannah'
    org: 'University of California Berkeley, School of Information'
header_image: user/themes/isrtheme/images/meta3.png
---

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) using visual or statistical methods can often be improved by doing pre-analysis of a given dataset. Getting to know the contents of the dataset, the types of data it contains, the shape of its values, and some of its quality issues will allow analysts to spend more time doing more meaningful analysis instead of wasting time dealing with data quality issues. This early discovery process can also help formulate initial questions or hypotheses that can help guide the analysis. For data creators, providing clear documentation for a dataset increases its value and reusability. MetaReader is a dataset meta-exploration and documentation tool designed to help analysts learn about a dataset. The tool uses simple and effective statistical and visualization techniques to help jump start EDA activities. It also provides insights about the shape and quality of the data. In addition, MetaReader provides documentation features for analysts and data creators to facilitate information retention and sharing.


######Introduction

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) of any given dataset can be an interesting experience. It can also be frustrating, especially if the analyst is unfamiliar with the dataset. Such frustrations arise from issues related to data quality, arrangement, missing values, or unclear labeling. Some datasets come with some form of documentation, such as README files, that explains their contents. Sometimes these too are not sufficient. Another source of frustration is ambiguity about the expected outcomes from an EDA activity. Questions and hypotheses can be valuable guides when starting an EDA activity. There are situations when analysts are given a task without any such guidelines, and instead are asked to “find something interesting.”

Analysts approach these issues in different ways. Some jump directly into visualizing the dataset using a visual analytics tool [[1]](#ref-1). Others prefer to open the dataset in a text or spreadsheet viewer. They scan through it to learn about the data and formulate questions or hypothesis before moving on to visual or statistical analysis.

Another challenge with EDA is dataset documentation. Having clear, robust documentation can be highly beneficial for analysts, but is a cumbersome task for data creators who want to release datasets to analysts. 

MetaReader is a meta-exploration and documentation tool for datasets. It is designed to facilitate three tasks associated with EDA: learning, documentation, and sharing.

**Learning**:  MetaReader helps analysts jump start their EDA activity by providing simple visualizations, statistics, and valuable insights about the dataset. These insights help users learn about the contents of the datasets, such as the data types of each column and shape (or distribution) of the values. They also help address potential data quality issues such as missing or mixed type values. Finally, these insights can help analysts formulate questions and hypotheses for their EDA activity.

**Documentation**: For data creators, documenting the content of a dataset adds great value to the dataset and benefits analysts. For analysts, documenting their initial thoughts, questions, and hypotheses about the dataset helps them keep track of their progress and also retain a record of their work. MetaReader facilitates documentation by providing its users with three distinct free text entry fields for each column in the dataset: descriptions, notes, and questions.

**Sharing**: MetaReader provides several ways to save all the information generated by the tool along with the information entered by users. For analysts, they can share their thoughts, questions and answers with others. For data creators, it can be an easy way to share good documentation (e.g. README files) of their datasets.


######Related Work

For the development of MetaReader, two areas of previous work were explored: data quality assessment and early exploration techniques.

#####Data Quality Assessment

Profiler is an integrated statistical analysis and visualization tool for data quality assessment [2]. It uses statistical and visualization techniques to automatically assess and highlight quality issues in tabular data. It also uses a rich and extensible Type Registry to detect data types on a semantic level (i.e. ZIP codes, phone numbers, geo-locations, etc.). The system also allows custom visualizations and transformations for each of these data types.

To assess data quality, the developers created a sophisticated taxonomy of data quality issues. The View Recommender component generates visual representations of the data values and also any detected anomalies.

In their discussion of results, the authors highlighted that the techniques they used helped domain experts spend more time performing meaningful analysis instead of spending time diagnosing data quality issues. They also discussed some of the performance optimizations implemented to accommodate memory limits of modern Web browsers.

To assess data quality, the developers created a sophisticated taxonomy of data quality issues. The View Recommender component generates visual representations of the data values and also any detected anomalies.

In their discussion of results, the authors highlighted that the techniques they used helped domain experts spend more time performing meaningful analysis instead of spending time diagnosing data quality issues. They also discussed some of the performance optimizations implemented to accommodate memory limits of modern Web browsers.

MetaReader focuses on two data quality issues: missing and mixed type values. It uses simple techniques to identify these two data quality issues. Furthermore, the tool focuses on basic data types (i.e. numbers, text, dates) and does not have semantic data type detection. On the other hand, the suggestion components of MetaReader provide a wider set of suggestions beyond just data quality.


######Early Exploration Techniques 

In his paper “Exploratory Vistas”, Stephen Few discusses some tasks and visualization techniques that can help analysts get acquainted with a new dataset [1]. He highlights the importance of doing some pre-analysis discovery before jumping into the analysis. His suggestions “provide contextual awareness that will reduce wild goose chases and false conclusions that plague many analytical journeys.”

He suggests studying the domain of the data and how it was collected, understanding the meaning of the terminology used in the dataset, and identifying categorical variables (dimensions) and quantitative variables (measurements).

Few also provides some suggestions about the types of visualizations to use for different data types to learn more about the dataset. For example, he uses histograms to look at the distribution of values for a given variable along with basic statistics (e.g. mean, median, quartiles, etc.). Few also uses bins to group values into groups of equal intervals and interactive visual techniques such as brushing and linking to discover interconnection among different variables.

To visualize potential correlations between two variables, he uses scatter plots, and table-lens charts. For time variables, he uses time series line charts to show change through time. For geospatial data, he uses geospatial maps with variable size markers to look at the geographical distribution of data values.

MetaReader implements some of these suggestions to display statistical and visual information to its users. In its current state, the tool focuses on individual variables and does not include any correlation-related components.

######Design Principles and Architecture

####Design Principles


__Client Side Implementation:__ MetaReader is a Web-based tool that runs entirely on the client’s browser. From a technical perspective, this reduces the need for a dedicated back-end hosting infrastructure. It also removes the need to send the data over to a server for processing. From an economic perspective, there is not a need to pay Web hosting and data traffic fees. This was important given the potential for processing large data files, which could be limited by Web-hosting traffic quotas. From a security and privacy perspective, users do not need to worry about their data being stored and processed remotely.

The downside of this approach is the potential loss of performance and scale. The data processing and visualization rendering is limited by the client’s machine. When dealing with large datasets, the tool can easily reach the SVG rendering limit of the browsers, potentially causing the browser window to stop working. Nevertheless, at the current stage, these are acceptable drawbacks that can be addressed in the future, if needed.

__Independent Column Cards:__
Each column in the dataset will be treated as an independent unit of focus. For each column, a “card” is rendered with all the statistics, visualizations, suggestions, and user entry boxes. The cards are in line with the tool’s focus on data shape, not content. It also allows for simpler implementation, and easier navigation through the data.

__Customized for Data Types:__
The first step of processing a dataset is to auto-detect the data type of each column. The supported data types are numbers (floats and integers), dates, and text. The contents of each column card are then customized for the data type.

__Editable Titles:__
To support flexible documentation and sharing, the page title, column card titles, and visualization titles must be editable. Users can rename these components on the interface before printing or saving their work.

__Focus on Data Shape, not Semantics:__
MetaReader is focused on the shape of the data. Thus, the tool does not dive deeper into the semantics of the loaded data.

__User Friendly Printing and Saving:__
MetaReader is also a dataset documentation tool. In addition to rendering in the browser, MetaReader must support saving the work to several formats. The output must also be optimized for the sharing medium. 

__Discoverability of features:__
To support better exploration, navigation, and discoverability of features, tooltips were used heavily, along with CSS styling, to highlight the role of interface components, show available actions, and reveal the values behind visualizations.


####Technical Architecture

__Workflow:__
The general workflow of MetaReader is similar to Profiler.


######References

[1] S. Few, "Exploratory Vistas: Ways to Become Acquainted with a Data Set for the First Time," Visual Business Intelligence Newsletter, vol. July/August/September, 2011. <a id="ref-1"></a>



